README.md, before:

FlindersDSpace-csv4itemimport
=============================

Description
-----------
Converts rows in a CSV file (plus optional bitstreams/files)
into a directory and file structure suitable for batch importing as items
into DSpace 3.x using the Simple Archive Format (SAF). The resulting
structure can then be imported into DSpace with a command like:
```
  /path/to/dspace import -a -s OUT_DIR -c COLLECTION_ID -m NEW_MAP_FILE -e USER_EMAIL [--test]
```
where OUT_DIR is the is the top directory of the output structure
created by this program (ie. typically "results/to_import" - defined
by SAF_DEST_FOLDER within bin/csv4itemimport.rb).

**Note that all items will be imported into the same collection.**

The input CSV file is mostly compatible with the
DSpace Batch Metadata Editing CSV file. Similarities include:
- RFC4180 CSV format
- Most columns contain the dublin core metadata fields
- If you want to store multiple values for a given metadata element,
  they must be separated with a double-pipe "||"

Differences include:
- The "id" column is not mandatory and will be ignored.
- The "collection" column is not required and will be ignored.
  All lines in the CSV file will be imported into the *same* collection
  which shall be specified on the "dspace import" command line
  via the -c or --collection option (see the example above).
- A new column "dspace.files" is required if one or more items (ie. CSV lines) has
  corresponding files to be ingested into DSpace via the CSV import
  process. If more than one file needs to be ingested for a single
  item, the list of files must be separated with "||"

In summary, only the following 2 column types shall be recognised:
- dublin core columns starting with "dc."
- the new (but optional) column "dspace.files"

All other column names shall be ignored.

CSV Gotchas
-----------
- Every column must be assigned a name on the first (header) line.
- Any blank columns before the last (right-most) column must either
  be removed or assigned a column name on the first line.
- Beware of single-quote characters (ie. "'") in the first position of
  a cell within a Microsoft Excel XLS or XLSX spreadsheet. These have
  a special meaning to Excel and will be stripped when saving as a
  CSV file. This may not be what you intended.

Application environment
-----------------------
Read the INSTALL file.


Installation
------------
Read the INSTALL file.


CSV file example
----------------
```
  id,collection,dc.contributor.author,dc.description.abstract[en_US],dc.subject[en_US],dc.title[en_US],Status,Editor,dspace.files
  14,123456789/0,Test Contrib Author1,This is the wonderful abstract,subj001||subj002b,Test title #001,Blah..,Blah..,file1.pdf||file2.txt||file3.csv
  15,123456789/0,Test Contrib Author2,This is the wonderful abstract,subj003a||subj004,Test title #002,Blah..,Blah..,
```
Interpretation:
- Columns id, collection, Status and Editor shall be ignored.
- If populated, Dublin Core metadata for the following columns shall be
  ingested into DSpace:
  * dc.contributor.author
  * dc.description.abstract (with language set to "en_US")
  * dc.subject (with language set to "en_US")
  * dc.title (with language set to "en_US")
- In the example above, each item will have 2 values for dc.subject.
- In the example above, there will be 3 bitstreams/files ingested for
  the first item, whereas there will not be any bitstreams/files
  ingested for the second item.


Cleaning the CSV file metadata
------------------------------
If you have good compatibility between the character encoding used in the
input CSV file and the character encoding used by DSpace then no cleaning
of CSV metadata should be needed. In this case you can set the "cleanup_mode"
property to "none" within etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml and
no cleaning will be performed.

However, I found that the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (from which the
CSV input file was derived) was created from pasting text from various
sources (eg. Microsoft Word or Adobe Acrobat Reader) and contained several
characters which were unsuitable for our DSpace instance. In particular,
the CSV rows contained metadata text which was outside the printable ASCII
text code range 32-254 (ie. 0x20-0x7e hexadecimal).

Note that in the discussion below, I have assumed that Microsoft Windows
(and hence Microsoft Excel) is using the character encoding of
Windows-1252 (also known as CP1252 and similar to ISO8859-1). This
appears to be the the case at my work place in Australia.

### Option 1

The best solution is to use a spreadsheet with the proper character encoding
for your DSpace instance. Below I list a few ways that should allow you to
convert from a Microsoft Excel XSL or XSLX spreadsheet on a PC to a utf-8
CSV file on a Linux host (ie. our DSpace Linux server in my case).

#### Option 1A

- Use Excel to save your XSL/XSLX Windows-1252 encoded spreadsheet as a
  "Unicode Text" file (which is tab delimited and apparently encoded as
  utf-16). As far as I can tell, the quoting (and escaping of quotes) for
  Excel "Unicode Text" is compatible with the CSV specification (RFC 4180)
  so we can replace tabs with commas in a later step.
- Move the Unicode Text file to the Linux DSpace server.
- Convert the encoding of the Unicode Text file to utf-8. Also convert from tab
  delimited to comma delimited. I have successfully carried out these 2
  conversions on the PC with Notepad++ v6.6.7 (using
  *Encoding > Convert to UTF-8* and
  *Search > Replace > Search Mode: Extended; Find what: \t; Replace with: , ;
  Replace All*) but for our environment, I used the following Linux commands.

```
iconv -f UTF16 -t UTF8 input.txt > output_utf8.tab
cat output_utf8.tab |tr '\t' , > output_utf8.csv

# Or as a single command
iconv -f UTF16 -t UTF8 input.txt |tr '\t' , > output_utf8.csv

```

- Configure and run this program to convert the CSV file into DSpace SAF.
  (Before running the program, ensure the "cleanup_mode" property is set
  to "none" in etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml.)
- Batch import DSpace SAF into DSpace.

#### Option 1B

- Use Excel to save your XSL/XSLX Windows-1252 encoded spreadsheet as a CSV
  file (which will continue to be encoded as Windows-1252). **I found that
  this step already corrupted some non-English characters by replacing them
  with question marks.** During the save as "CSV (Comma delimited)" step in
  Excel 2010, I have tried the following without success:
  * Tools > Web options > Encoding tab > Save this document as: "Unicode (UTF-8)" > OK

- Move the CSV file to the Linux DSpace server.
- Convert the encoding of the CSV file to utf-8. For our environment, I used
  the following Linux command.

```
iconv -f WINDOWS-1252 -t UTF8 input.csv > output_utf8.csv
```

- Configure and run this program to convert the CSV file into DSpace SAF.
  (Before running the program, ensure the "cleanup_mode" property is set
  to "none" in etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml.)
- Batch import DSpace SAF into DSpace.

#### Option 1C

- Use LibreOffice or OpenOffice (instead of Excel) to save your XSL/XSLX
  Windows-1252 encoded spreadsheet as a CSV with utf-8 encoding. During
  save as "Text (CSV)", click Edit Filter Settings > Character Set:
  "Unicode (UTF-8)" > OK. (I have not tested this.)
- Move the CSV file to the Linux DSpace server.
- Configure and run this program to convert the CSV file into DSpace SAF.
  (Before running the program, ensure the "cleanup_mode" property is set
  to "none" in etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml.)
- Batch import DSpace SAF into DSpace.


### Option 2

Alternatively, appropriate configuration of etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml
allowed this issue to be overcome.  In particular:
- the "cleanup_mode" property was set to "fromLookup_toLookupStringWithHtmlCode"
- the string-pairs listed under the "lookup" section allowed
  the 1-byte character specified by the hexadecimal key to be replaced
  by the corresponding string; otherwise
- 1-byte characters between 128-255 (or 0x80-0xff) were replaced with
  their HTML code equivalents (eg. "&amp;#x80;" - "&amp;#xFF;"); otherwise
- the remaining characters were displayed without change

Note that characters 128-159 (or 0x80-0x9f) and some others are
illegal in HTML4, so these are the ones you are most likely to
override in the lookup table.

Although not all characters can be represented by a single byte in most
modern character encodings (eg. utf-8), this work-around allows a
semi-automated solution for the author of the batch import metadata. I
regard this solution as semi-automated rather than fully-automated
because some investigation is needed into:
- which characters used within the CSV file cause a problem for your
  DSpace instance
- a suitable replacement string for such characters

Commit message:

Minor column name change to dspace.filedescriptions. Update doco.

README.md, after:

FlindersDSpace-csv4itemimport
=============================

Description
-----------
Converts rows in a CSV file (plus optional bitstreams/files)
into a directory and file structure suitable for batch importing as items
into DSpace 3.x using the Simple Archive Format (SAF). The resulting
structure can then be imported into DSpace with a command like:
```
  /path/to/dspace import -a -s SAF_DIR -c COLLECTION_ID -m NEW_MAP_FILE -e USER_EMAIL [--test]
```
where SAF_DIR is the is the top directory of the output structure
created by this program (ie. typically "results/to_import" - defined
by SAF_DEST_FOLDER within bin/csv4itemimport.rb).

**Note that all items will be imported into the same collection.**

The input CSV file is mostly compatible with the
DSpace Batch Metadata Editing CSV file. Similarities include:
- RFC4180 CSV format
- Most columns contain the dublin core metadata fields
- If you want to store multiple values for a given metadata element,
  they must be separated with a double-pipe "||"

Differences include:
- The "id" column is not mandatory and will be ignored.
- The "collection" column is not required and will be ignored.
  All lines in the CSV file will be imported into the *same* collection
  which shall be specified on the "dspace import" command line
  via the -c or --collection option (see the example above).
- A new column "dspace.files" is required if one or more items (ie. CSV lines) has
  corresponding files to be ingested into DSpace via the CSV import
  process. If more than one file needs to be ingested for a single
  item, the list of files must be separated with "||"
- A new column "dspace.filedescriptions" is required if you want
  the corresponding filenames listed in "dspace.files" to have
  a file-description. If more than one file needs to be ingested
  for a single item, the list of corresponding file-descriptions
  must be separated with "||" and must appear in exactly the same
  order as the filenames. For a given item, this field can either
  be empty or have the same number of file-descriptions as there
  are files.

In summary, only the following 2 column types shall be recognised:
- dublin core columns starting with "dc."
- the new (but optional) columns "dspace.files" and
  "dspace.filedescriptions"

All other column names shall be ignored.

CSV Gotchas
-----------
- Every column must be assigned a name on the first (header) line.
- Any blank columns before the last (right-most) column must either
  be removed or assigned a column name on the first line.
- Beware of single-quote characters (ie. "'") in the first position of
  a cell within a Microsoft Excel XLS or XLSX spreadsheet. These have
  a special meaning to Excel and will be stripped when saving as a
  CSV file. This may not be what you intended.

Application environment
-----------------------
Read the INSTALL file.


Installation
------------
Read the INSTALL file.


CSV file example
----------------
```
  id,collection,dc.contributor.author,dc.description.abstract[en_US],dc.subject[en_US],dc.title[en_US],Status,Editor,dspace.files
  14,123456789/0,Test Contrib Author1,This is the wonderful abstract,subj001||subj002b,Test title #001,Blah..,Blah..,file1.pdf||file2.txt||file3.csv
  15,123456789/0,Test Contrib Author2,This is the wonderful abstract,subj003a||subj004,Test title #002,Blah..,Blah..,
```
Interpretation:
- Columns id, collection, Status and Editor shall be ignored.
- If populated, Dublin Core metadata for the following columns shall be
  ingested into DSpace:
  * dc.contributor.author
  * dc.description.abstract (with language set to "en_US")
  * dc.subject (with language set to "en_US")
  * dc.title (with language set to "en_US")
- In the example above, each item will have 2 values for dc.subject.
- In the example above, there will be 3 bitstreams/files ingested for
  the first item, whereas there will not be any bitstreams/files
  ingested for the second item.


Cleaning the CSV file metadata
------------------------------
If you have good compatibility between the character encoding used in the
input CSV file and the character encoding used by DSpace then no cleaning
of CSV metadata should be needed. In this case you can set the "cleanup_mode"
property to "none" within etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml and
no cleaning will be performed.

However, I found that the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (from which the
CSV input file was derived) was created from pasting text from various
sources (eg. Microsoft Word or Adobe Acrobat Reader) and contained several
characters which were unsuitable for our DSpace instance. In particular,
the CSV rows contained metadata text which was outside the printable ASCII
text code range 32-254 (ie. 0x20-0x7e hexadecimal).

Note that in the discussion below, I have assumed that Microsoft Windows
(and hence Microsoft Excel) is using the character encoding of
Windows-1252 (also known as CP1252 and similar to ISO8859-1). This
appears to be the the case at my work place in Australia.

### Option 1

The best solution is to use a spreadsheet with the proper character encoding
for your DSpace instance. Below I list a few ways that should allow you to
convert from a Microsoft Excel XSL or XSLX spreadsheet on a PC to a utf-8
CSV file on a Linux host (ie. our DSpace Linux server in my case).

#### Option 1A

- Use Excel to save your XSL/XSLX Windows-1252 encoded spreadsheet as a
  "Unicode Text" file (which is tab delimited and apparently encoded as
  utf-16). As far as I can tell, the quoting (and escaping of quotes) for
  Excel "Unicode Text" is compatible with the CSV specification (RFC 4180)
  so we can replace tabs with commas in a later step.
- Move the Unicode Text file to the Linux DSpace server.
- Convert the encoding of the Unicode Text file to utf-8. Also convert from tab
  delimited to comma delimited. I have successfully carried out these 2
  conversions on the PC with Notepad++ v6.6.7 (using
  *Encoding > Convert to UTF-8* and
  *Search > Replace > Search Mode: Extended; Find what: \t; Replace with: , ;
  Replace All*) but for our environment, I used the following Linux commands.

```
iconv -f UTF16 -t UTF8 input.txt > output_utf8.tab
cat output_utf8.tab |tr '\t' , > output_utf8.csv

# Or as a single command
iconv -f UTF16 -t UTF8 input.txt |tr '\t' , > output_utf8.csv

```

- Configure and run this program to convert the CSV file into DSpace SAF.
  (Before running the program, ensure the "cleanup_mode" property is set
  to "none" in etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml.)
- Batch import DSpace SAF into DSpace.

#### Option 1B

- Use Excel to save your XSL/XSLX Windows-1252 encoded spreadsheet as a CSV
  file (which will continue to be encoded as Windows-1252). **I found that
  this step already corrupted some non-English characters by replacing them
  with question marks.** During the save as "CSV (Comma delimited)" step in
  Excel 2010, I have tried the following without success:
  * Tools > Web options > Encoding tab > Save this document as: "Unicode (UTF-8)" > OK

- Move the CSV file to the Linux DSpace server.
- Convert the encoding of the CSV file to utf-8. For our environment, I used
  the following Linux command.

```
iconv -f WINDOWS-1252 -t UTF8 input.csv > output_utf8.csv
```

- Configure and run this program to convert the CSV file into DSpace SAF.
  (Before running the program, ensure the "cleanup_mode" property is set
  to "none" in etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml.)
- Batch import DSpace SAF into DSpace.

#### Option 1C

- Use LibreOffice or OpenOffice (instead of Excel) to save your XSL/XSLX
  Windows-1252 encoded spreadsheet as a CSV with utf-8 encoding. During
  save as "Text (CSV)", click Edit Filter Settings > Character Set:
  "Unicode (UTF-8)" > OK. (I have not tested this.)
- Move the CSV file to the Linux DSpace server.
- Configure and run this program to convert the CSV file into DSpace SAF.
  (Before running the program, ensure the "cleanup_mode" property is set
  to "none" in etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml.)
- Batch import DSpace SAF into DSpace.


### Option 2

Alternatively, appropriate configuration of etc/conf/dublin_core_value_cleanup.yaml
allowed this issue to be overcome.  In particular:
- the "cleanup_mode" property was set to "fromLookup_toLookupStringWithHtmlCode"
- the string-pairs listed under the "lookup" section allowed
  the 1-byte character specified by the hexadecimal key to be replaced
  by the corresponding string; otherwise
- 1-byte characters between 128-255 (or 0x80-0xff) were replaced with
  their HTML code equivalents (eg. "&amp;#x80;" - "&amp;#xFF;"); otherwise
- the remaining characters were displayed without change

Note that characters 128-159 (or 0x80-0x9f) and some others are
illegal in HTML4, so these are the ones you are most likely to
override in the lookup table.

Although not all characters can be represented by a single byte in most
modern character encodings (eg. utf-8), this work-around allows a
semi-automated solution for the author of the batch import metadata. I
regard this solution as semi-automated rather than fully-automated
because some investigation is needed into:
- which characters used within the CSV file cause a problem for your
  DSpace instance
- a suitable replacement string for such characters
